So, this morning, I opened my phone and
it's the same story again and again.
First, we heard a few days ago that Jack
Dorsey's Block just laid off almost half
of his staff and says AI is the reason.
Just recently, Atlassian cuts 1,600
people to self-fund investments in AI.
Your feed, my feed is full of AI took my
job posts. Is this the beginning of a
jobless future or are companies just
slapping AI on old-school layoffs to
make them sound innovative? Today, we're
going to look at the data, the
companies, and the people behind the
headlines, and I will be joined by
someone who actually knows the numbers.
I actually use the report she creates
every 2 years. It's called the Jobs
Report by the World Economic Forum, and
I was just there. She knows all the
numbers, and she knows exactly what's
happening on the job market. Are these
layoffs AI? Should we be afraid? Should
we be scared? Or are companies just
using the word AI to justify layoffs? By
the end, you'll know which jobs are
actually at risk, what AI native really
means, and what you can practically do
in the next 90 days to future-proof your
career, even if you're not a tech
person. I'm not a tech person, but I'm
using so much of AI. I'm going to talk
about this. So, what's going on on the
market? Let's start with the headline
that broke the internet. Jack Dorsey and
Block, 4,000 people. So, Block is the
company behind Square, Cash App, and
Afterpay, and they announced that
they're cutting 40% of its workforce,
more than 4,000 people, bringing
headcount down to under 6,000. Jack
Dorsey didn't say, "We had a terrible
quarter." He didn't blame a recession.
pointed at intelligent tools and AI
agents. In his letter and interviews, he
says smaller, flatter teams can now do
the same work, that AI fundamentally
changes what it means to build and run a
company, and that most firms will
inevitably follow this path. Media from
CNN to Forbes jumped on the story as one
of the clearest examples of a CEO
saying, "We laid people off because of
AI." Okay, I had to talk to someone
who's a professional in this. Ask Saadia
Zahidi, managing director of World
Economic Forum, are the AI layoffs real?
>> Well, um I'm going to not say who it is,
but I'm going to uh share what they told
me, which is that
they feel that uh this is one of the top
people on on um uh jobs here.
And he told me that essentially he
thinks that a lot of firms are sort of
maybe using this moment of concern
around artificial intelligence to
essentially take care of the the issue
that you're talking about, which is that
there was some over-hiring 3 years ago,
and so now is the time to change that,
and you know, it's sort of a somewhat
convenient moment to use this this time
to do it.
>> Okay.
>> So from inside the room, the message is
pretty blunt. Yes, AI is real, but it's
also a perfect excuse to fix the
over-hiring that happened during the
last boom. Now let's talk about
Atlassian and the AI restructuring
narrative. Right after Block, Atlassian
announced it would cut about 10% of its
global workforce, roughly around 1,600
roles. Atlassian says it's self-funding
bigger bets on AI and enterprise
products. The CEO says that AI is
changing the mix of skills we need, the
number of roles required in certain
areas, and he says we can't really
pretend AI has nothing to do with it.
And it's not just these two companies.
Across 2025 and early 2026, companies
from Amazon and Microsoft to media and
fintech startups have cited AI in their
layoff announcements. In the US alone,
employers explicitly blamed AI for tens
of thousands of job cuts in 2025,
a huge jump from the years before.
Sometimes that's real automation.
Sometimes it's just smart branding for
cost cutting. Okay, let's move from
buzzwords and press release to actual
data. In early March, Anthropic, a
company behind Claude, released one of
the most detailed studies so far on AI
and jobs, and I absolutely loved it.
Thank you so much, Anthropic, for doing
that. It's called labor market impacts
of AI and you measure and early
evidence. So instead of asking in
theory, could AI do this task? They
looked at observed exposure where
workers are already using tools like
Claude to do their jobs right now. And
here is what they found. For computer
and math jobs, hello my education.
Software engineers, data scientists,
large language models could touch
something like 90 plus percent of tasks.
But in practice, workers report using AI
on only a fraction of them so far. The
jobs with the highest AI exposure today
are white-collar roles, business and
finance, computer science, law, computer
service. Comment down below if your job
is listed here or your education is
listed here. I'm mathematics and
economics by education. Oh, and of
course, office administration. Uh there
are some safe jobs. About 30% of workers
have basically zero AI exposure right
now. Cooks, bartenders, mechanics,
cleaners, many trades and in-person
service jobs. And here's the subtle but
important point. They don't see a big
spike in unemployment yet for most
AI-exposed jobs. What they do see is a
slowdown in hiring into those roles,
especially for younger workers. So the
people in those jobs aren't losing them
overnight, but it's getting harder for
new people to get into those fields in
the first place. Let me tell you my
personal story. I totally see this
trend. So I run three YouTube channels
to do Instagrams, email newsletters, a
lot of things. My team uses AI every
single day for research, for scripts,
for translations, for thumbnails. And
we've been doing that for about 18
months now. And in the past three weeks
we deployed Claude projects for almost
every single social media that we're on
and that sped up things immensely. I
don't know if you noticed, but we
started posting two videos on this on
this channel instead of one and
production just sped up. What one person
does has changed completely. My
producers are no longer spending hours
on research. They are not writing first
drafts from scratch. That time went into
somewhere else, like producing more
episodes, quality control, judgment
calls, into the stuff that actually
requires a human. And honestly, that
shift from doing the work to directing
it changes what you're worth, which
brings me to today's sponsor. I have run
a media company with 35 people. I've
been creating content for over a decade
and I still remember the early days when
I said yes to any brand deal. No, really
early days, like a year ago I would
still say yes to every brand deal.
Anyways, low rates, insane timelines,
editing at midnight. I thought if I said
no, the deals would stop coming. The
problem was never the content. I just
didn't have the system for knowing what
I was actually worth. The Viral Income
Lab was built by marketing executives
who work directly with brands, people
who understand how brands decide
budgets, what they look for in creators,
and why some creators consistently get
higher paying long-term deals. They
teach you how to calculate your rate,
pitch professionally, negotiate without
it being awkward, and turn one
collaboration into a recurring
partnership. It works whether you're on
YouTube, Instagram, TikTok, or running a
podcast. And you don't need millions of
followers. The whole program lives
exclusively on Kajabi, so everything is
in one place. If your goal for 2026 is
to build predictable income from your
content, check it out. You get lifetime
access to all the training videos,
scripts, templates, resources, and guest
expert sessions. Plus, and this matters,
you have real human support from
experienced marketing executives if you
have questions before, during, and after
negotiations. For my audience, the Viral
Income Lab is available at a discounted
price of $489, and that's lifetime
access. Click the link in the
description and start building
sponsorships that actually respect your
value. Now, back to our conversation
with Sadia. Around 4 weeks ago, I asked
my chief of staff CEO, I asked her to
hire someone who would help me with
scripts for brand deals. Cuz it's like
you need to look at what the brand sends
you, then it has to be a personal story.
Like there is so many different points
you need to connect for that. And we
started looking some testing some
people. People were like, we found
someone who's genius, but like a
thousand pounds for a script for a
60-second video.
I'm like
expensive. And I trained a cloud
project, and we completely eliminated a
need to hire someone for just scripts.
Did that scare me? Yes. The thing is it
is happening. It kind of makes me sad,
but it kind of wants me to help you guys
with the next steps, because it is
happening. And this is basically the
story that this Anthropic report is
actually telling. The jobs aren't
disappearing yet. The tasks inside those
jobs are being reshuffled. One person
can handle more, you don't need more
people. And the people who understand
which of their tasks have been
reshuffled and move proactively are the
ones who come out ahead. Saudi explains
this with a very simple picture. Imagine
the whole global workforce are just 100
people.
>> Let's bring it down to let's pretend the
entire global workforce is 100 people.
Um about 50
50-something of them
would need rapid reskilling by 2030.
About 2/3 of those could be reskilled
within their current role. That's what
employers are telling us.
And about 1/3 of them would have to be
reskilled or upskilled and redeployed
into a different role inside the
organization.
However, there's about 11 people in this
overall 100-person workforce that
wouldn't necessarily have an easy place
to be reskilled to. And I think that's
where the tension comes in.
A lot of the change could probably be
handled where people are currently
employed.
But there is going to be a significant
share of the global workforce that will
not find a role inside their own
industry that would need to move to a
completely different industry. And that
is where, you know, basic human
connection and your social networks and
your professional networks, that's where
all of that comes in.
>> For out of those 11 people, which
industries are they in?
>> Oh, multiple industries. So, we we do
take a look at what are the declining
roles, what are the um growing roles.
And when it comes to the declining side,
I mean, you wouldn't be surprised to
know that it includes people who are
administrative assistants. It's people
who are in some parts of customer
service that is now getting digitally
automated. Um but, there's also a lot of
growth, right? So,
you know, the the the highest growth
sectors include agriculture, include
education. These are all things that the
world population still very much needs.
And the the the need for example,
there's, you know, a huge shortage of
teachers around the world. That is still
very much needed and it doesn't mean
that, you know, a profession such as
that one is getting replaced by
technology. So, I do want to present the
full picture beyond the ones that that
are getting displaced.
>> So, the real danger isn't AI takes
everyone's jobs. It's those 11 people
out of every 100 who don't have a clear
place to go. So, even if today's layoffs
are sometimes AI washed for
shareholders, the deeper trend is real.
Routine, rules-based office work is
under pressure. And some jobs will
naturally disappear or radically change
as AI gets better. Let's talk about
safer zones. Safer doesn't mean
perfectly safe forever. But, today, jobs
with low AI exposure tend to be reality
native jobs where you physically fix,
cook, build, or care for things.
Mechanics, electricians, plumbers,
you've probably seen those viral reels
where the The is the new millionaire.
Chefs, cleaners, delivery, construction,
high-touch human roles where your main
value is That's what I'm looking for.
Emotional intelligence, complex human
judgment. I don't know a strategist
inside a company or early childhood
education, many healthcare roles, social
and community work. These are much
harder to fully automate because they
combine physical presence, messy
real-world environments, and human
involvement. Let me give you a useful
framework, a way to figure out exactly
where you personally stand. So, every
job has two layers. Layer one is task
layer, the repeatable, rule-based work.
Write this email, fill this report,
answer this ticket, schedule this
meeting, process the claim. Layer two,
this is AI. You're below AI here. Layer
two is above AI and this is the judgment
layer. The stuff that requires context,
relationships, you feel, you have
intuition, experience. AI is eating
layer one fast everywhere across every
industry, not just in tech, in law, in
marketing, in accounting, in medicine,
and customer support. The Entropic
report found that for white-collar
roles, AI can technically touch over 90%
of tasks. In practice, workers are using
it maybe 30 to 40% right now, but that
number is growing every 6 months. So,
the question is not is my job at risk?
The question is what percentage of my
day is layer one versus layer two? If
your answer is 80% layer one, meaning
most of what you do is routine,
templated, rule-based, you have a real
problem. Not because you're going to be
fired tomorrow, but because every year
that passes, your layer one work gets
cheaper and the company doing your
annual review knows that. If your answer
is 80% layer two, judgment,
relationships, strategy, creative
decisions, you're actually in a stronger
position than you were two years ago.
Because again, AI is handling the layer
one work for you, which means you can do
more layer two work in the same hours,
which brings us to the real question. If
you want to stay ahead of this curve,
what should you actually learn? I asked
Saadia what other skills that every
worker needs to develop today.
>> I would say the human skills
have just become even more important.
So, oddly enough, in a highly
technologically driven world, it is the
human skills that have become more
important than ever before, and that's
very clear from every 2 years we put out
this list of the top 10 skills, and um
that's basically what comes through very
loud and clear through that future of
jobs um survey. So, that's one piece.
There is some element of that, which is
also about being able to work closely
with technology.
But, it's a couple of the top 10. Most
of the skills in the top 10 relate to
creativity,
empathy, interpersonal interactions,
leadership skills, social influence,
self-management, being able to regulate
your own self, especially in the midst
of so much change. So, those are the
kinds of things that are rising to the
top.
Third point,
unfortunately,
those are not the skills that most
employers test for.
>> Mhm.
>> Right? So, most employers say that's
what they want, but when you get into an
interview process, that is rarely ever
the set of things, unless people are
doing it anecdotally, that is rarely
ever the set of things that they're
looking for.
>> So, the paradox of the AI era is the
more powerful the technology becomes,
the more valuable the human skills
become. And if you look across Saadia's
work, the Future of Jobs report, and the
new AI research, the people who thrive
tend to have a three-part skill set:
human skills, creativity, communication,
empathy, leadership, social influence,
self-management, the ability to handle
work with other people. AI skills, not
building models from scratch, but using
tools like Claude, ChatGPT, Copilot, and
others to write first drafts, summarize,
brainstorm, generate ideas, analyze
data. Knowing how to design good prompts
and workflows so that AI does the boring
part. Domain skills, real expertise in
something, marketing, law, finance,
medicine, design, trades, the context
you need to judge whether AI's answer
makes sense and to turn it into real
decisions. By the way, being AI native
doesn't mean you work in a startup in
Silicon Valley. It means that whatever
you do, HR, sales, design, small
business, your default is what can I
offload to AI so I can spend more time
on the uniquely human parts of this job.
The challenge is that most schools and
companies still don't explicitly teach
those skills. So, where do you actually
practice them?
>> So, I think education systems are
starting to change and recognize that
the previous education system, which was
deeply individualistic,
competitive, right? If you got the the
number one position in your class, well,
someone else had to be number two, for
example. That's the old model, but I
think a lot of education systems are
starting to change, certainly from what
we heard from some of the universities
here.
Um
because they recognize the value of
collaboration. They recognize the value
of group work. And I would they know if
if there's one piece of advice I would
give to anybody who is currently a
student, take on some of those group
projects. Work with other people. See
how you can
negotiate, work together, collaborate,
and you'll find that working with others
you're going to learn so much more, and
it'll prepare you for the workforce,
because that's what most of our
workforces are.
>> So, if you're a student or early in your
career, the fastest way to build
future-proof skills isn't just another
online course. It's projects with other
people, group assignments, hackathons,
side hustles, startups, volunteering,
anywhere you have to negotiate,
coordinate, and ship something together.
To make this practical, here's a simple
way to start. In the next 30 days, pick
one AI tool and use it every day for a
current work or studies, for writing,
summarizing, analysis, or planning. In
the next 60 days, ship one small
AI-powered improvement, an automated
report, a smarter template, a content
generator. Perplexity computer is
blowing my mind right now with content
generation. Something that serves you
real time. In the next 90 days, pick one
human skill from Sadie's list,
communication, negotiation, leadership,
self-management, and deliberately
practice it in a real project with other
people. If you do just that, you're
already ahead of most people reacting to
AI from fear instead of design. So,
where does it all leave us? Yes, some
big companies are hiding behind AI when
they fire people. It looks great to
shareholders, we're optimizing, we're
investing in the future. Sometimes
that's true, sometimes it's just a
glossy label on old-school cost cuts.
But, under the PR, the deeper trend is
still real and unavoidable. Routine,
rules-based office work is being eaten
by software and AI. New jobs are
appearing in tech, green industries,
healthcare, education, and they demand a
different mix of skills. The premium is
rising on people who can combine human
skills, AI tools, and domain expertise.
We asked Sadia what she would say to a
young person who feels anxious seeing
AI, geopolitical tensions, and
automation all at once.
>> All of these are potential trends. Some
of these are trends that are highly
likely to come true, yes.
But,
throughout
the last
20 years that I've been in the
workplace, we have had these moments
before.
There has been um
geopolitical tension before. There have
been wars before. There have been
technological changes before.
A A has happened. There's been the great
financial crisis. Um so there have been
many disruptions. There's been COVID. So
I think we should
um bear in mind that
that hasn't dented
employment yet.
That hasn't
That has required us to be resilient and
to adapt and those are certainly skills
that young people should develop.
But I'm very I remain always very
optimistic and hopeful about the future
and that would maybe be my one piece of
advice. Invest in yourself and
>> Yeah, and stay optimistic. AI will
absolutely change which jobs exist and
how we do them. But it doesn't get to
write the whole story. Governments,
companies, universities, and you still
have choices. You can't control whether
a CEO decides to announce AI layoffs.
You can control whether you become the
kind of person whose job is easy to
narrate away or a kind of person who
knows how to use AI, lead people, and
create value in the new system. If you
treat AI as a thing that's going to take
away your job, you'll spend the next few
years really scared. If you treat it as
new electricity for your career, your
real job becomes to design how you're
going to use it. And that job is only
just beginning. If you enjoyed this
episode, I highly recommend watching an
episode that I've created with the CEO
of LinkedIn on the future of jobs. He
said more than a million jobs actually
appeared because of AI and he knows the
data cuz he's the CEO of LinkedIn. The
episode is right here. Do not forget to
subscribe to this channel and do not
forget to subscribe to my newsletter.